---
layout: post
title:  Korteweg deVries equation (Inverse Scattering Transform)
date:   2016-11-1 15:01:35 +0300
image:  KDV_IST.png
tags:   STEM nonlinear-PDEs matrices waves spectral-methods FFT inverse-methods eigenvalues mathematics
app:    kdv
script: kdv
d3version: https://d3js.org/d3.v3.min.js
crossfilter: False
numeric: True
truncation: 0
---

The Koreteweg-deVries equation is a nonlinear partial differential equation that describes the motion of "solitons," waves that are localized and hold their shape as they travel &endash; even after interacting with other solitons. The taller the wave, the faster it goes. They're beautiful,mesmerizing patterns that arise in a variety of sciences and engineering. 

You can adjust the amplitude and width of an initial disturbance by sliding the orange bars. The shape quickly breaks up into solitons. They circle around and so you can watch for a while and see them interact.

It turns out that any initial disturbance breaks up into a set of solitary waves and &emdash; <span id=miracle>somewhat miraculously</span> &emdash; the amplitude of those states can be precisely predicted by solving Schrödinger's Equation (yes, [that Schrödinger](https://duckduckgo.com/?q=%22Schrodinger+cat%22+&t=brave&iar=images&iax=images&ia=images)!) for an energy potential in the shape of the initial disturbance. The number of bound energy states is exactly the number of solitary waves in the KdV system and their energies correspond to the amplitude of the waves! 

Without a fair bit of physics background this seems all way too complicated for a simple web page but you don't have to solve it, your browser can!

You are watching it actively solve the KdV equation by time-stepping with a 4th order Runge-Kutta method and using spectral methods to handle the spatial derivates. Solving Schrodinger's equation takes a bit of calculating but, if you press <span id=starter>HERE</span>, the wave will pause just to get the calculation done. 

Solving a nonlinear differential equation and an eigenvalue problem at the same time is a lot of hard work for even the cleverest of browsers! But when it's done, you'll see the waves line up where they're supposed to.

All a bit of fun to demonstrate how powerful your browser is and how much potential it has to do any complicated problem you can throw at it.






http://www.sciencecartoonsplus.com/pages/bio.php
