---
title: The Splendid Splinter
date: 2017-09-25 15:55:02 +0300
image: baseball.png
app: baseball
tags: baseball, visualization, coordinate-system
crossfilter: false
numeric: false
truncation: 100
d3version: https://cdnjs.cloudflare.com/ajax/libs/d3/3.4.2/d3.min.js
status: keep
---



Amidst the deep forest green seats at Fenway Park, a bright red seat in deep right center field stands out.
Seat 21 in Section 42, Row 37, is an incredible 
502 feet away from home plate and on June 9, 1946, Ted Williams hit a home run to it,  
setting a park record that still stands. Williams was 
one of the greatest hitters of all time with a batting average of .344 and 1,798 runs. 

After his retirement (his last at-bat was a homerun at Fenway), he wrote the influential 
(and beautifully illustrated) book, *The Science of Hitting.*  

Baseball enthusiasts are notoriously interested in statistics and so the owner of 
an online fantasy baseball site contacted me to do some visualizations for his users. The 
one that proved most popular was a visualization of where balls are hit over the 
course of a game, a season, or a career. 
 
For this project, hits were recorded as landing in one of 38 zones which had confusing names 
like "oflcf", "ofrfc", "ofrfl", etc. This madeit challenging for fans to see patterns 
among players.

The challenge for me had to do with figuring out where to put the balls on the screen, given 
the zone name. Because a baseball field isn't shaped like a wedge of pie but more like an 
ice cream cone, the zones don't have consistent shapes and so a new coordinate system was 
developed, with the origin at home plate.

As an homage to Williams's skill as a hitter, I've drawn one of his seasons that nicely shows 
his pattern of hits to right field.




